
Contributing to the project
===========================

Thank you so much for considering to contribute to the project! We welcome all
contributions, and we are grateful even for the smallest fixes. üõ†Ô∏èüîéüë∑

The following is a set of guidelines for contributing to the project. These are
mostly guidelines, not rules. Use your best judgment, and feel free to propose
changes to this document in a pull request.

If you're worried you may be doing something wrong, ‚ú®don't worry‚ú®. If you're still
worried, though, know that everyone makes mistakes and we are here to help you
fix them. Our [Code of Conduct](/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) outlines the commitment of
all who work on and contribute to `astrodata` to fostering a comfortable and
mutually supportive development environment.


## Contribution flowchart

[Here, there will be a flowchart image with a decision flow for whether to
submit an issue or pull request.]

## Submitting an issue

Submit an issue to [our GitHub
issues](https://github.com/GeminiDRSoftware/astrodata/issues) for problems you
are unsure you have a solution to, or do not currently have the time to work on
yourself. Even if you may plan to work on it sometime in the future, it's
useful to log the issue in case someone else is already working on it!

We include several issue templates with fill-in-the-answer style formatting to
make your submission as quick and easy as possible. Ideally, you will provide a
code snippet (if relevant) that reproduces the issue without any external
dependencies. That's not always possible nor feasible, though, so don't
hesitate to note you don't have one. Any code examples---even ones with
external dependencies---are better than none!

## Submitting a Pull Request

Pull request are also managed on the `astrodata` [GitHub
page](https://github.com/GeminiDRSoftware/astrodata/issues). Pull requests
(PR's) let you contribute directly to the `astrodata` codebase with code,
documentation, or anything else _you've_ written! These may seem more
intimidating than an issue, but the only real difference is that you are
contributing code.

Otherwise, the process is basically the same; contributers weight in, the situation is discussed as needed, and at the end of the discussion the code is improved. There's no "finality" to a PR. There is always time to dicuss the changes as carefully as with an issue.

If this still feels too complicated or intimidating, feel free to raise an
issue or contact a maintainer directly.

**See [GitHub's guide to contributing through PRs](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request)** for more information about how to start a PR.

## Contacts

While it is preferred you contribute using one of the above methods, if
discretion is required or you are having trouble please do not hesitate to
reach out to one of the core maintainers directly:

### Maintainers

+ Teal (dillon.teal@noirlab.edu)
